# Cert Prep inLearning

## Managing Risk and Preventing Data Loss

### Identify challenges of data visibility

Effective security depends on total visibility, which means a 360-degree view. An end-to-end view of the health and status of your network. Troubleshoot problems and monitor threats.

Threat management systems constantly monitor the network to see who has joined the network, any activity on the network, and alert administrator to anomalies.

OODA loop: observe -> orient -> decide -> act (feedback, returning to observe)

The attack surface is expanding due to cloud-based technologies, mobility, and the IoT.
Authenticate every person, process, or device using MFA
Adhere to the principle of least privilege.

### Comparing security deployments

Use a layered approach: network, endpoint, and application security systems.
Defense methods combine logical and physical security, security appliances, along with policies that outline proper behavior.

Logical security includes access control techniques that ensure authN and authZ, and accounting (AAA) in an information system.
Physical security includes limits to access buildings and equipment by using physical controls, such as locks, lighting, gates, and smart cards.
Security appliances includes intrusion detection/prevention systems, gateways, and firewalls that are tuned to allow or deny traffic based on a set of rules.

Policies define a set of rules of conduct for anyone or anything that interacts with the system resources. Furthermore, it can include topics such as password complexity, antivirus guidelines, or user education.

A layered defense posture helps provide protection in case one or more defense methods fail.

### Utilizing SIEM, SOAR, and log management

SIEM system combines logs and events from different systems, then normalizes and maps the data so that it can integrate into a central system.

SIEM system functions can provide:

1. continuous monitoring, trend awareness, and auditing
2. correlation of events, which gives historic or real-time data perspective, and conducts data analysis based on a set of rules
3. digital dashboard, which allows a graphical visual of alerts
4. reduces the volume of data by consolidating duplicate records.

SOAR enhances SIEM by helping security teams investigate security incidents more efficiently.

SOAR system functions can provide:

1. coordinates by using threat intelligence when detecting incidents for a faster response
2. automates by adding runbook functionality that automates complex incident response, procedures, and investigations.
3. correlates by providing case management tools along with dashboards and reports to document incident response.

Log management is critical on a network. Therefore, SIEM and SOAR can improve performance and response time so you can better secure your network.

### Runbook automation

It is a set of guidelines for handling different tasks
It can interact with many types of objects in the infrastructure, such as applications, databases, and hardware.
It includes documentation on new procedures or systems
It can include specialized documentation written for a team, specific use case, or even a proprietary system.
It is a set of guidelines that can help streamline your workflow.

### nmap

