# Cert Prep inLearning

## Security Monitoring

### Understanding Attacks

Known or potential vulnerabilities across different areas that might be exposed.

Vulnerability is a flaw in a system that can be exploited by threats to gain unauthorized access to an asset. When we reduce the vulnerabilities in each attack surface, we can reduce the overall risk.

Types of cyberattacks:

1. passive: noninvasive, which means monitoring transmissions; capturing passwords or data files;
2. active: tries to break into secured systems; steal, modify information, introduce malicious code.

Surface attack: software, hardware, IoT, network, people.

### Identifying vulnerability testing

Vulnerability testing: risk analysis, vulnerability scanning, penetration testing;

1. risk analysis: evaluates the impact of succeful exploits; identifies types of likely threat actors; uses consultants, risk management frameworks, and tools; note: risk analysis does not equal risk management.

2. vulnerability assessment: uses ping sweeps and port scans to assess vulnerable systems and services; uses tools such as OpenVAS, Nessus, Qualys, Nmap.

3. Penetration testing: test an organization's resiliency in being able to prevent an attack; uses tools such as metasploit and core impact. Steps: reconnaissance, scanning, gain access, cover tracks, reporting.

### Attacking the network

DoS: lock out legitimate users; action: flood the server, malformed packets.
DDoS botnet: millios of unknowing hosts are infected with malware, so they become zombies that are part of the botnet; the botnet is ontrolled by a command and control (C&C) server; handlers issue instructions to the zombies; the attack occurs when, at a go signal from the C&C server, the zombies launch an attack on an unsuspecting victim.

MiTM: attacker sits in the middle of the communication stream; intercept and possibly alter the communication stream

Attacks at any layer of the OSI: there are many different types of cyber threats; some are lesser known, and some are older; malicious actors will try all exploits to gain control of a system;

### Describing web application attacks

Web app can be a target because: a relational database often contains sensitive information; are a frequent target for attacks; web app can be used to embed malicious code, or even links that when clicked will direct the client to another site.

**code injection**: sends or injects code from user-supplied data to a system though a web application, through which the normal execution of the code is changed; application does not properly validate user input; will have the same permissions as the web application, which could lead to privilege escalation.

**sql injection**: an attacker inserts a series of SQL statements into a query by manipulating data input into an application; application does not properly validate user input; once in, the malicious actor can read records, modify data, and issue commands to the OS.

cross-site scripting(XSS): it has the objective to collect information, launch an attack, spread malware;

prevent web application attacks:

* IPS to detect and prevent malicious scripts; web proxy to prevent direct contact with the web server and database; reputation-based service to prevent users from navigating to malicious websites.