# Cisco CBROPS exam

## Module Assessing Vulnerabilities

### NIST Guide to conduct Risk Assessments

https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf

Nist scales vulnerability severity in five levels:

Very high: The vulnerability is exposed and exploitable, and its exploitation could result in severe impacts

High: The vulnerability is of high concern, based on the exposure of the vulnerability and ease of exploitation and/or on the severity of impacts that could result from its exploitation

Moderate: The vulnerability is of moderate concern, based on the exposure of the vulnerability and ease of exploitation and/or on the severity of impacts that could result from its exploitation

Low: The vulnerability is of minor concern, but effectiveness of remediation could be improved.

Very low: The vulnerability is not of concern.

### CVSS

The metrics determine the CVSS: base group, temporal metric group, environmental metric group.

**The base group** represents the basic qualities of a vulnerability that are constant over time and across user environments.
    **Exploitability metrics**: 
        Attack Vector (or Access vector is how the threat exploits the vulnerability), 
        Attack Complexity (how easy (or difficult) it is for the threat to exploit the vulnerability),
        Privileges Required (describes how the threat gains access), 
        User Interaction (either none or required).

    **Impact Metrics**: 
        confidentiality, 
        integrity impact, 
        availability impact

    **Scope**: captures whether a vulnerability is one vulnerable component impacts resources in components beyond its security scope.

**The temporal metrics** indicates the current state of the exploit, which will change over the lifetime of the vulnerability.
    
    **Exploit code maturity**: 
    **Remediation Level**:
    **Report Confidence**:

**Environmental metric group** characterizes a vulnerability that is unique to a use's environment.

    **Modified base metrics**       | at this point, the analyst to override individual base 
                                    | metrics, such as Exploitability, Scope, or Impact.

    **Confidentiality requirement** | security requirement that measures how the vulnerability
    **Integrity requirement**       | affects the confidentiality, integrity, and availability 
    **Availability requirement**    | of an asset.


### CVE - Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures

CVE provides detailed information on known vulnerabilities
Each CVE has an ID, score, and addtional information
The score is derived from a set of metrics using CVSS
The CVE feeds into the National Vulnerability Databse (NVD)

### Summary

CVSS (Common vulnerability scoring system) provides the metrics to CVE (Common vulnerabilities and Exposure), which feeds the NVD (National Vulnerability Database)

### Challenge

About the temporal metric group, explain:

1. the exploit code maturity: this is a metric that measure the likelihood of the vulnerability being attacked, and is typically based on the current state of exploit techniques, exploit code availability, or active, 'in-the-wild' exploitation.

2. outline what metrics determine the remediation level: the remediation level metric is an important factor for prioritization. Generally, the typical vulnerability is unpatched when initially published. Workaround or hotfixes may offer interim remediation until an official patch or upgrade is issued. The main metrics are: not defined or unavailable mean there is either no solution available or it is impossible to apply; workaround is an unofficial, non-vendor solution available; temporary hotfix means that there is an official but temporary fix available; official fix means that a complete vendor solution is available.

3. define report confidence: This metric measures the degree of confidence in the existence of the vulnerability and the credibility of the known technical details.