# CyberOps Associate

All this files are contents from the cisco cyberops associate course from the netacad. As well, I've included some exercises and notes.

[The first chapter](1.0.0.TheDanger.md) focus on an introduction of cybersecurity domain, describing about the threat actors, the security of IoT, threat impact, and three types of personal information.

[The second chapter](2.0.0.FirghtersInTheWarAgainstCybercrime.md) introduces elements of a SOC (security operations center) such as job roles, main processes, technologies. Additionally, the chapter introduces the concepts of security and availability, and an overview about how to become a defender.

The third chapter is about Windows OS and it is divided into several files. [The first file](3.0.0.TheWindowsOS.md) describe the history of Windows OS in summary, and focus on OS architecture. [The second file](./3.3.0-WindowsConfigAndMon.md) focus on describe the three main types of users on Windows, describe the command line interfaces, monitoring tools, and Windows OS networking at the user level. And [the last file](3.4.0-WindowsSecurity.md) focus on security, describing Windows Defender and Defender Firewall, some important local security policies, the update management process, event viewer and netstat. Additionally, a [summary](3.5.0-WindowsOperatingSystemSummary.md) with a quiz of the chapter.

Then, there are files about Linux OS. [In the first](4.0.0-LinuxBasics.md), in summary it describes what is Linux and why it is used in SOC. [The second file](4.2.0-LinuxShell.md) shows some basic commands. [The next file](4.3.0-LinuxServerAndClients.md) shows the difference between a linux server and a linux client and, additionally, how the configuration is done in servers, and some best practices about how to hardening them. [In this file](4.5.0-LinuxFileSystem.md), it is described the file systems in a big picture way with comparison between them, and it is described how authorization and permissions work. [The last file](4.7.1-WorkingOnALinuxHost.md) is about process and forks, how update the system. Additionally, [here is the summary with the quiz](4.8.0-LinuxBasicsSummary.md).