# First shot

2 A Cisco router is running IOS 15. What are the two routing table entry types that will be added when a network administrator brings an interface up and assigns an IP address to the interface? (Choose two.)

**local route interface / directly connected interface**

A local route interface routing table entry is found when a router runs IOS 15 or higher or if IPv6 routing is enabled. Whenever an interface is addressed and enabled (made active), a directly connected interface is automatically shown in the routing table.

5 What type of route is created when a network administrator manually configures a route that has an active exit interface?

**static**

A static route is one that is manually configured by the network administrator. 

7 Which routing protocol is used to exchange routes between internet service providers? 
**BGP**

BGP is a path vector routing protocol and it is used by internet service providers to exchange routes. 

19 Which two devices would commonly be found at the access layer of the hierarchical enterprise LAN design model? (Choose two.) 

**access point / Layer 2 switch **

While some designs do route at the access layer, the two devices that should always be placed at the access layer of the hierarchical design model are an access point and a Layer 2 switch. A modular switch is commonly used at the core layer. Routing by a Layer 3 device is commonly used in the distribution layer. The firewall is a device in the Internet edge network design. 

21 What is the function of the distribution layer of the three-layer network design model? 

**aggregating access layer connections**

The function of the distribution layer is to provide connectivity to services and to aggregate the access layer connections 

22 What two components of traditional **web security appliances** are examples of functions integrated into a Cisco Web Security Appliance? (Choose two.)

**URL filtering**
**web reporting**

The Cisco Web Security Appliance is a secure web gateway which combines advanced malware protection, application visibility and control, acceptable use policy controls, reporting, and secure mobility functions. With traditional web security appliances, these functions are typically provided through multiple appliances. It is not a firewall appliance in that it only filters web traffic. It does not provide VPN connections, nor does it provide email virus and spam filtering; the Cisco Email Security Appliance provides these functions.

# second shot

6 In which memory location is the routing table of a router maintained?

**RAM**

The routing table of a router is maintained in RAM, which is volatile memory. If a router loses power or is rebooted, the content of RAM is lost and the routing table must be rebuilt.

8 Which two protocols are link-state routing protocols? (Choose two.) 

**ISIS and OSPF** are link-state routing protocols. EIGRP and RIP are distance vector routing protocols. BGP is a path vector protocol.

13 Which characteristic describes a wireless client operating in active mode? 

must know the SSID to connect to an AP 

A wireless client operating in active mode must know the name of the SSID. Probe requests are broadcast by a client across multiple channels and include the SSID name and supported standards. Active mode is used if an AP is configured to not broadcast beacon frames. 

14 What is a characteristic of the WLAN passive discover mode? 

The AP periodically sends beacon frames containing the SSID. 

In passive mode, the wireless clients learn what networks and APs are available. The client learns this information from beacon frames, sent by the APs, that contain the WLAN SSID, supported standards, and security settings. 