# first shot

4. What are two methods used by cybercriminals to mask DNS attacks? (Choose two.) 
   **fast flux, domain generation algorithms**

   Fast flux, double IP flux, and domain generation algorithms are used by cybercrimals to attack DNS servers and affect DNS services. Fast flux is a technique used to hide phishing and malware delivery sites behind a quickly-changing network of compromised DNS hosts (bots within botnets). The double IP flux technique rapidly changes the hostname to IP address mappings and the authoritative name server. Domain generation algorithms randomly generate domain names to be used as rendezvous points. 

15.  What are the three major components of a worm attack? (Choose three.) 
    an enabling vulnerability, a propagation mechanism, a payload
    A computer can have a worm installed through an email attachment, an executable program file, or a Trojan Horse. The worm attack not only affects one computer, but replicates to other computers. What the worm leaves behind is the payload--the code that results in some action. 

27. Which field in the IPv6 header points to optional network layer information that is carried in the IPv6 packet?
    **next header**
    Optional Layer 3 information about fragmentation, security, and mobility is carried inside of extension headers in an IPv6 packet. The next header field of the IPv6 header acts as a pointer to these optional extension headers if they are present. 

32. Which type of network attack involves randomly opening many Telnet requests to a router and results in a valid network administrator not being able to access the device? 
    SYN flooding
    The TCP SYN Flood attack exploits the TCP three-way handshake. The threat actor continually sends TCP SYN session request packets with a randomly spoofed source IP address to an intended target. The target device replies with a TCP SYN-ACK packet to the spoofed IP address and waits for a TCP ACK packet. Those responses never arrive. Eventually the target host is overwhelmed with half-open TCP connections and denies TCP services. 

40. Once a cyber threat has been verified, the US Cybersecurity Infrastructure and Security Agency (CISA) automatically shares the cybersecurity information with public and private organizations. What is this automated system called? 
    AIS
    The US CISA uses a system called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS). The AIS system shares verified attack vectors and indicators with the private and public sectors. 


48. protocol analyzer - used to capture traffic and show what is happening on the network
    IPS - monitors traffic and compares it agains configured rules
    SPAN - copies frames received on one or more ports to a port connected to an analysis device.

49. Which technology is a proprietary SIEM system?
    SPLUNK
    Security Information Event Management (SIEM) is a technology that is used in enterprise organizations to provide real-time reporting and long-term analysis of security events. Splunk is a proprietary SIEM system. 

50.  Which two functions are provided by NetFlow? (Choose two.) 
    it provides 24x7 statistics on packets that flow through a Cisco router or multilayer switch
    it provides a complete audit trail of basic information about every IP flow forwarded on a device.

    NetFlow is a Cisco IOS technology that provides statistics and complete audit trails on TCP/IP flows on the network. Some of the capabilities of NetFlow include the following: 24x7 network and security monitoring, network planning, traffic analysis, identification of network bottlenecks, and IP accounting for billing purposes. 