# Threat Intelligence

## Network Intelligence Communities

| Organization | Description|
|--------------|------------|
|MITRE         |The Mitre Corporation maintains a list of common vulnerabilities and exposures (CVE) used by prominent security organizations|
|FIRST         | Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) is a security organization that brings together a variety of computer security incident response teams from government, commercial, and educational organizations to foster cooperation and coordination in information sharing, incident prevention and rapid reaction|
|(ISC)2     |International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC2) provides vendor neutral education products and career services to more than 75,000+ industry professionals in more than 135 countries|
|CIS    |The Center for Internet Security (CIS) is a focal point for cyber threat prevention, protection, response, and recovery for state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT) governments through the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC). The MS-ISAC offers 24x7 cyber threat warnings and advisories, vulnerability identification, and mitigation and incident response|

## Threat Intelligence Service

### Talos

The goal of Talos is to help protect enterprise users, data, and infrastructure from active adversaries. The Talos team collects information about active, existing, and emerging threats. Talos then provides comprehensive protection against these attacks and malware to its subscribers.

### FireEye

FireEye offers SIEM and SOAR with the Helix Security Platform, which uses behavioral analysis and advanced threat detection and is supported by the FireEye Mandiant worldwide threat intelligence network. Helix is cloud-hosted security operations platform that combines diverse security tools and threat intelligence into a single platform.

The FireEye Security System blocks attacks across web and email threat vectors, and latent malware that resides on file shares. It can block advanced malware that easily bypasses traditional signature-based defenses and compromises the majority of enterprise networks. It addresses all stages of an attack lifecycle with a signature-less engine utilizing stateful attack analysis to detect zero-day threats.

### Automated Indicator Sharing

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) offers a free service called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS). AIS enables the real-time exchange of cyber threat indicators (e.g., malicious IP addresses, the sender address of a phishing email, etc.) between the U.S. Federal Government and the private sector.

AIS creates an ecosystem where, as soon as a threat is recognized, it is immediately shared with the community to help them protect their networks from that particular threat.

### Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) Database

The United States government sponsored the MITRE Corporation to create and maintain a catalog of known security threats called Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). The CVE serves as a dictionary of common names (i.e., CVE Identifiers) for publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities.

The MITRE Corporation defines unique CVE Identifiers for publicly known information-security vulnerabilities to make it easier to share data.

Search the internet for “Mitre Corporation” and view information about CVE

### Threat Intelligence Communication Standards

Three common threat intelligence sharing standards include the following:

* Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX) - This is a set of specifications for exchanging cyber threat information between organizations. The Cyber Observable Expression (CybOX) standard has been incorporated into STIX.
* Trusted Automated Exchange of Indicator Information (TAXII) – This is the specification for an application layer protocol that allows the communication of CTI over HTTPS. TAXII is designed to support STIX.
* CybOX - This is a set of standardized schema for specifying, capturing, characterizing, and communicating events and properties of network operations that supports many cybersecurity functions.

### Threat Intelligence Platforms

A threat intelligence platform centralizes the collection of threat data from numerous data sources and formats. **There are three major types of threat intelligence data**. The first is **indicators of compromise (IOC)**. The second is **tools, techniques, and procedures (TTP)**. The third is **reputation information about internet destinations or domains**. 

### Check Your Understanding - Identify the Threat Intelligence Information Source

1. What is the free service that is offered by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security? AIS
2. What is a world leading threat intelligence team with a goal to help protect enterprise users, data, and infrastructure from active adversaries? Talos
3. Which security operations platform integrates and enhances a range of security tools and threat intelligence?? FireEye Helix
4. What are three threat intelligence information sharing specifications? STIX, TAXII, CyberOX

### Threat Intelligence Summary

Network Intelligence Communities

There are many organizations which provide network intelligence. Network security organizations include SANS, Mitre, FIRST, SecurityNewsWire, (ISC)2, and CIS. You must keep abreast of the latest threats and continue to upgrade your skills. The Cisco Annual Cybersecurity Report and the Mid-Year Cybersecurity Report are great resources to use. It is also useful to read blogs and listen to podcasts.

Threat Intelligence Services

Threat intelligence services allow the exchange of threat information such as vulnerabilities, indicators of compromise (IOC), and mitigation techniques. This information is not only shared with personnel, but also with security systems. As threats emerge, threat intelligence services create and distribute firewall rules and IOCs to the devices that have subscribed to the service. One such service is the Cisco Talos Threat Intelligence Group. FireEye is another security company that offers services to help enterprises secure their networks. FireEye uses a three-pronged approach combining security intelligence, security expertise and technology. FireEye offers SIEM and SOAR with the Helix Security Platform which uses behavioral analysis and advanced threat detection and is supported by the FireEye Mandiant worldwide threat intelligence network. The U.S Department of Homeland Security (DHS) offers a free service called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS). AIS enables the real-time exchange of cyber threat indicators between the U.S. Federal Government and the private sector. The United States government sponsored the MITRE Corporation to create and maintain a catalog of known security threats called Common Vulnerabilities and Exposure (CVE). Three common threat intelligence sharing standards include Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX), Trusted Automated Exchange of Indicator Information (TAXII), and CybOX. These open standards provide the specifications that aid in the automated exchange of cyber threat intelligence information in a standard format.

### Module 20: Threat Intelligence Quiz

1. Which service is provided by the Cisco Talos Group? Topic 20.2.0 - The Cisco Talos group collects information about active, existing, and emerging threats which can be used by Cisco Security products in real time to provide fast and effective security solutions. Collecting information about active, existing, and emerging threats

2. What does the MITRE Corporation create and maintain? Topic 20.2.0 - The MITRE Corporation creates and maintains a catalog of known security threats called Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). The CVE serves as a dictionary of common names (i.e., CVE Identifiers) for publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities. CVE

3. What is the primary function of (ISC2)? Topic 20.1.0 - International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC2) is a network security organization that provides vendor neutral education products and career services. to provide vendor neutral education products and career services

4. Which threat intelligence sharing open standard specifies, captures, characterizes, and communicates events and properties of network operations? Topic 20.2.0 - Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX) is a set of specifications for exchanging cyberthreat information between organizations. Cyber Observable Expression (CybOX) is a set of standardized schema that specifies, captures, characterizes, and communicates events and properties of network operations and that supports many cybersecurity functions. Trusted Automated Exchange of Indicator Information (TAXII) is a specification for an application layer protocol that allows the communication of CTI over HTTPS and is designed to support STIX. CybOX

5. What is the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) used by the MITRE Corporation? Topic 20.2.0 - The MITRE Corporation creates and maintain a dictionary of common names (i.e., CVE Identifiers) for publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities known as Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). it is a dictionary of CVE identifiers for publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities

6. Which service is offered by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) that enables real-time exchange of cyberthreat indicators between the U.S. Federal Government and the private sector? Topic 20.2.0 - The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) offers a free service called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) which enables the real-time exchange of cyberthreat indicators (e.g., malicious IP addresses, the sender address of a phishing email, etc.) between the U.S. Federal Government and the private sector. AIS

7. What is the primary function of SANS? Topic 20.1.0 - One of the primary functions of the SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS) Institute is the maintenance of the Internet Storm Center early warning system. to maintain the Internet Storm Center

8. Why do several network organizations, professionals, and intelligence agencies use shared open standards for threat intelligence? Topic 20.2.0 - Several network organizations, professionals, and intelligence agencies use shared open standards to enable the exchange of cyber threat intelligence (CTI) in an automated, consistent, and machine readable format. to enable the exchange of CTI in an automated, consistent, and machine readable format.

9. What is the primary purpose of the Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST)? Topic 20.1.0 - The primary purpose of the Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) is to enable a variety of computer security incident response teams to collaborate, cooperate, and coordinate information sharing, incident prevention, and rapid reaction between the teams. to enable a variety of computer security incident response teams to collaborate, cooperate, and coordinate information sharing, incident prevention, and rapid reaction strategies.

10. What threat intelligence group provides blogs and podcasts to help network security professionals remain effective and up-to-date? Topic 20.1.0 - The Cisco Talos Group provides blogs and podcasts on security-related topics from a number of industry experts. These blogs and podcasts provide advice, research, and recommended mitigation techniques. Talos