# Endpoint protection

## Antimalware Protection

### Endpoint Security

This obviously includes computers and servers, however many other devices can also access the network. With the rapid growth of the Internet of Things (IoT), other types of devices are now endpoints on the network. This includes networked security cameras, controllers, and even light bulbs and appliances. Each endpoint is potentially a way for malicious software to gain access to a network. In addition, new technologies, such as cloud, expand the boundaries of enterprise networks to include locations on the internet for which enterprises are not responsible.

Specifically, there are two internal LAN elements to secure:

**Endpoints**: Hosts commonly consist of laptops, desktops, printers, servers, and IP phones, all of which are susceptible to malware-related attacks.
**Network infrastructure**: LAN infrastructure devices interconnect endpoints and typically include switches, wireless devices, and IP telephony devices. Most of these devices are susceptible to LAN-related attacks including MAC address table overflow attacks, spoofing attacks, DHCP related attacks, LAN storm attacks, STP manipulation attacks, and VLAN attacks.

### Host-Based Malware Protection

Antimalware programs may detect viruses using three different approaches:

**Signature-based**: This approach recognizes various characteristics of known malware files.
**Heuristics-based**: This approach recognizes general features shared by various types of malware.
**Behavior-based**: This approach employs analysis of suspicious behavior.

Host-based antivirus protection is also known as agent-based, which means agent-based antivirus runs on every protected machine. Rather than, agentless antivirus protection performs scans on hosts from a centralized system. **Agentless systems have become popular for virtualized environments in which multiple OS instances are running on a host simultaneously.**

**Host-based Firewall**, it is a host-based software and it restricts incomkng and outgoing connections to connections initiated by that host only. Additionally, it can prevent host from becoming infected and stop infected hosts from spreading malware to other hosts.

**Host-based Security Suites**, These host-based security suites include antivirus, anti-phishing, safe browsing, Host-based intrusion prevention system, and firewall capabilities. These various security measures provide a layered defense that will protect against most common threats. In addition to the protection functionality provided by host-based security products **is the telemetry function**. Most host-based security software includes robust logging functionality that is essential to cybersecurity operations. Some host-based security programs will submit logs to a central location (SIEM, SOAR) for analysis.

### Network-Based Malware Protection

The following are examples of devices and techniques that implement host protections at the network level.

**Advanced Malware Protection (AMP)**: This provides endpoint protection from viruses and malware.
**Email Security Appliance (ESA)**: This provides filtering of SPAM and potentially malicious emails before they reach the endpoint. An example is the Cisco ESA.
**Web Security Appliance (WSA)**: This provides filtering of websites and block listing to prevent hosts from reaching dangerous locations on the web. The Cisco WSA provides control over how users access the internet and can enforce acceptable use policies, control access to specific sites and services, and scan for malware.
**Network Admission Control (NAC)**: This permits only authorized and compliant systems to connect to the network.

### Check Your Understanding - Identify Antimalware Terms and Concepts

1. True or False? Endpoints are hosts on the network that can access or be accessed by other hosts on the network. True

2. Which type of antimalware software recognizes various characteristics of known malware files? Signature-based

3. Which type of endpoint protection includes iptables and TCP Wrapper? host-based firewall

4. What provides filtering of websites and block listing to prevent endpoints from accessing malicious web pages? web security appliance

5. Which type of endpoint protection permits only authorized and compliant devices to connect to the network? network admission and control.

## Host-Based Intrusion Prevention

### Host-Based Firewalls

Host-based personal firewalls **are standalone software programs that control traffic entering or leaving a computer**. Firewall apps are also available for Android phones and tablets.

Host-based firewalls may use a set of predefined policies, or profiles, to control packets entering and leaving a computer. They also may have rules that can be directly modified or created to control access **based on addresses, protocols, and ports**. Host-based firewall applications can also be configured to issue alerts to users if suspicious behavior is detected. They can then offer the user the ability to allow an offending application to run or to be prevented from running in the future.

One approach to intrusion prevention **is the use of distributed firewalls**. Distributed firewalls combine features of host-based firewalls with centralized management. The management function pushes rules to the hosts and may also accept log files from the hosts.

### Host-Based Intrusion Detection

The distinction between **host-based intrusion detection and intrusion prevention is blurred**. In fact, some sources refer to host-based intrusion detection and prevention systems (HIPDS). Because the industry seems to favor the use of the acronym HIDS, we will use it in our discussion here.

**A host-based intrusion detection system (HIDS)** is designed **to protect hosts against known and unknown malware**. A HIDS can perform **detailed monitoring and reporting on the system configuration and application activity**. **It can provide log analysis, event correlation, integrity checking, policy enforcement, rootkit detection, and alerting**. A HIDS will frequently include a management server endpoint.

#### HIDS Operation

It can be said that host-based security systems function as both **detection and prevention systems because they prevent known attacks and detect unknown potential attacks**. **A HIDS uses both proactive and reactive strategies**. A HIDS can prevent intrusion because **it uses signatures to detect known malware and prevent it from infecting a system**. However, this strategy is only good against known threats. **Signatures are not effective against new, or zero day, threats**. In addition, some malware families exhibit **polymorphism**. This means that variations of a type, or family, of malware may be created by attackers that will evade signature-based detections by changing aspects of the malware signature just enough so that it will not be detected. An additional set of strategies are used to detect the possibility of successful intrusions by malware that evades signature detection:

**Anomaly-based**: Host system behavior is compared to a learned baseline model of normal behavior. Significant deviations from the baseline are interpreted as the result of some sort of intrusion. If an intrusion is detected, the HIDS can log details of the intrusion, send alerts to security management systems, and take action to prevent the attack. The measured baseline is derived from both user and system behavior. Because many things other than malware can cause system behavior to change, anomaly detection can create many erroneous results which can increase the workload for security personnel and also lower the credibility of the system.
**Policy-based**: Normal system behavior is described by rules, or the violation of rules, that are predefined. Violation of these policies will result in action by the HIDS. The HIDS may attempt to shut down software processes that have violated the rules and can log these events and alert personnel to violations. Most HIDS software comes with a set of predefined rules. With some systems, administrators can create custom policies that can be distributed to hosts from a central policy management system.

### Check your Understanding - Identify the Host-Based Intrusion Protection Terminology

1. What allows Linux system administrators to configure network access rules that are part of the Linux kernel Netfilter modules? **iptables** allows Linux system administrators to configure network access rules that are part of the Linux kernel Netfilter modules.

2. Which of the following uses a profile-based approach to configuring firewall functionality? **Windows Firewall** uses a profile-based approach to configuring firewall functionality.

3. Which of the following is a rule-based control and logging system for Linux? **TCP Wrappers** is a rule-based control and logging system for Linux.

4. Which of the following uses a learned baseline model?    **Anomaly-based strategy** uses a learned baseline model of normal behavior.

## Application Security

### Attack surface

Recall that **a vulnerability is a weakness in a system or its design that could be exploited by a threat**. An attack surface **is the total sum of the vulnerabilities in a given system that is accessible to an attacker**. **The attack surface can consist of open ports on servers or hosts, software that runs on internet-facing servers, wireless network protocols, and even users**.

The attack surface is continuing to expand. More devices are connecting to networks through the Internet of Things (IoT) and Bring Your Own Device (BYOD). Much of network traffic now flows between devices and some location in the cloud. Mobile device use continues to increase. All of these trends contribute to a prediction that global IP traffic will increase threefold in the next five years.

The SANS Institute describes three components of the attack surface:

**Network Attack Surface**: The attack exploits vulnerabilities in networks. This can include conventional wired and wireless network protocols, as well as other wireless protocols used by smartphones or IoT devices. Network attacks also exploit vulnerabilities at the network and transport layers.
**Software Attack Surface**: The attack is delivered through exploitation of vulnerabilities in web, cloud, or host-based software applications.
**Human Attack Surface**: The attack exploits weaknesses in user behavior. Such attacks include social engineering, malicious behavior by trusted insiders, and user error.

### Application Block Listing and Allow Listing

**One way of decreasing the attack surface is to limit access to potential threats by creating lists of prohibited applications. This is known as block listing.**

Application block lists can dictate which user applications are not permitted to run on a computer. Similarly, allow lists can specify which programs are allowed to run. In this way, known vulnerable applications can be prevented from creating vulnerabilities on network hosts.

Allow lists are created in accordance with a security baseline that has been established by an organization. The baseline establishes an accepted amount of risk, and the environmental components that contribute to that level of risk. Non-allow listed software can violate the established security baseline by increasing risk.

### System-Based Sandboxing

Sandboxing is a technique that allows suspicious files to be executed and analyzed in a safe environment. Automated malware analysis sandboxes offer tools that analyze malware behavior. These tools observe the effects of running unknown malware so that features of malware behavior can be determined and then used to create defenses against it.

As mentioned previously, **polymorphic malware changes frequently and new malware appears regularly. Malware will enter the network despite the most robust perimeter and host-based security systems**. HIDS and other detection systems can create alerts on suspected malware that may have entered the network and executed on a host. Systems such as Cisco AMP can track the trajectory of a file through the network, and can “roll back” network events to obtain a copy of the downloaded file. This file can then be executed in a sandbox, such as Cisco Threat Grid Glovebox, and the activities of the file documented by the system. This information can then be used to create signatures to prevent the file from entering the network again. The information can also be used to create detection rules and automated plays that will identify other systems that have been infected.

Cuckoo Sandbox is a popular free malware analysis system sandbox. It can be run locally and have malware samples submitted to it for analysis. A number of other online public sandboxes exist. These services allow malware samples to be uploaded for analysis. Some of these services are VirusTotal, Joe Sandbox, and CrowdStrike Falcon Sandbox.

An interesting online tool is ANY.RUN, which is shown in the figure. It offers the ability to upload a malware sample for analysis like any online sandbox. However, it offers a very rich interactive reporting functionality that is full of details regarding the malware sample. ANY.RUN runs the malware and captures a series of screen shots of the malware if it has interactive elements that display on the sandbox computer screen. You can view public samples that have been submitted by ANY.RUN users to investigate information about newly discovered malware or malware that is currently circulating on the internet. Reports include network and internet activity of the malware, including HTTP requests and DNS queries. Files that are executed as part of the malware process are shown and rated for threat. Details are available for the files including multiple hash values, hexadecimal and ASCII views of the file contents, and the system changes made by the files. In addition, identifying indicators of compromise, such as the malware file hashes, DNS requests, and the IP connections that are made by the malware are also shown. Finally, the tactics taken by the malware are mapped to the MITRE ATT&CK Matrix with each tactic linked to details on the MITRE website.

## Endpoint Protection Summary

Antimalware Protection

We can define endpoints as hosts on the network that can access or be accessed by other hosts on the network. This obviously includes computers and servers. With the rapid growth of the Internet of Things (IoT), other types of devices are now endpoints on the network. Each endpoint is a potential way for malicious software to gain access to a network. Not all endpoints are within a network. Many endpoints connect to networks remotely over VPN. The network perimeter is always expanding. Various network security devices are required to protect the network perimeter from outside access. However, many attacks originate from inside the network also. Therefore, securing an internal LAN is nearly as important as securing the outside network perimeter. After an internal host is infiltrated, it can become a starting point for an attacker to gain access to critical system devices. There are two internal LAN elements to secure: Endpoints and Network Infrastructure.

Antivirus/Antimalware Software is installed on a host to detect and mitigate viruses and malware. It does this using three different approaches, signature-based (using various characteristics of known malware files), heuristics-based (using general features shared by various types of malware), and behavior-based (using an analysis of suspicious behavior). Many antivirus programs are able to provide real-time protection by analyzing data as it is used by the endpoint. A Host-based Firewall restricts incoming and outgoing connections to connections initiated by that host only. Some firewall software can also prevent a host from becoming infected and stop infected hosts from spreading malware to other hosts. Most host-based security software includes logging functionality that is essential to cybersecurity operations. Network-based malware prevention devices are also capable of sharing information among themselves to make better informed decisions. Protecting endpoints in a borderless network can be accomplished using network-based, as well as host-based techniques.

Host-based Intrusion Prevention

Host-based firewalls may use a set of predefined policies, or profiles, to control packets entering and leaving a computer. They also may have rules that can be directly modified or created to control access based on addresses, protocols, and ports. They can also be configured to issue alerts if suspicious behavior is detected. Logging varies depending on the firewall application. It typically includes date and time of the event, whether the connection was allowed or denied, information about the source or destination IP addresses of packets, and the source and destination ports of the encapsulated segments. Distributed firewalls may also be used. They combine features of host-based firewalls with centralized management. Some examples of host-based firewalls include Windows Defender Firewall, iptables, nftables, and TCP Wrappers. A host-based intrusion detection system (HIDS) protects hosts against known and unknown malware. A HIDS can perform detailed monitoring and reporting on the system configuration and application activity, log analysis, event correlation, integrity checking, policy enforcement, rootkit detection, and alerting. A HIDS will frequently include a management server endpoint. Because the HIDS software must run directly on the host, it is considered an agent-based system. A HIDS uses both proactive and reactive strategies. A HIDS can prevent intrusion because it uses signatures to detect known malware and prevent it from infecting a system. Signatures are not effective against new, or zero day, threats. In addition, some malware families exhibit polymorphism. Additional strategies to detect the possibility of successful include anomaly-based detection and policy-based detection.

Application Security

An attack surface is the total sum of the vulnerabilities in a given system that is accessible to an attacker. It may consist of open ports on servers or hosts, software that is running on internet-facing servers, wireless network protocols, remote devices, and even users. The attack surface is continuing to expand. More devices are connecting to networks through the Internet of Things (IoT) and Bring Your Own Device (BYOD. The SANS Institute describes three components of the attack surface: Network Attack Surface, Software Attack Surface, and Human Attack Surface. One way of decreasing the attack surface is to limit access to potential threats by creating lists of prohibited applications. This is known as block listing. Application block lists can dictate which user applications are not permitted to run on a computer. Similarly, allow lists can specify which programs are allowed to run. Allow lists are created in accordance with a security baseline that has been established by an organization. Block lists can be manually created, or they can be obtained from various security services. Sandboxing is a technique that allows suspicious files to be executed and analyzed in a safe environment. Automated malware analysis sandboxes offer tools that analyze malware behavior. These tools observe the effects of running unknown malware so that features of malware behavior can be determined and then used to create defenses against it. Polymorphic malware changes frequently and new malware appears regularly. Malware will enter the network despite the most robust perimeter and host-based security systems. HIDS and other detection systems can create alerts on suspected malware that may have entered the network and executed on a host.

## Module 22: Endpoint Protection Quiz

1. Which antimalware software approach can recognize various characteristics of known malware files to detect a threat? **Signature-based**. Topic 22.1.0 - Antimalware programs may detect viruses using three different approaches:   signature-based - by recognizing various characteristics of known malware files; heuristics-based - by recognizing general features shared by various types of malware; behavior-based - through analysis of suspicious activities

2. In most host-based security suites, which function provides robust logging of security-related events and sends logs to a central location? **telemetry**. Topic 22.1.0 - The telemetry functionality in most host-based security suites provides robust logging functionality and submits logs to a central location for analysis.

3. Which technology might increase the security challenge to the implementation of IoT in an enterprise environment? **cloud computing**. Topic 22.1.0 - With cloud computing, boundaries of enterprise networks are expanded to include locations on the Internet for which the enterprises are not responsible. Malicious software might access the internal network endpoints to attack internal networks.

4. Which statement describes the term attack surface? **it is the total sum of vulnerabilities in a system that is accessible to an attacker**. Topic 22.3.0 - An attack surface is the total sum of the vulnerabilities in a system that is accessible to an attacker. The attack surface can consist of open ports on servers or hosts, software that runs on Internet-facing servers, wireless network protocols, and even users.

5. Which HIDS is an open-source based product? **OSSEC**. Topic 22.2.0 - The Open Source HIDS SECurity (OSSEC) software is an open-source HIDS that uses a central manager server and agents that are installed on the hosts that are to be monitored.

6. Which device in a LAN infrastructure is susceptible to MAC address-table overflow and spoofing attacks? **SWITCH**. Topic 22.1.0 - Switches are LAN infrastructure devices interconnecting endpoints. They are susceptible to LAN-related attacks including MAC address-table overflow attacks, spoofing attacks, LAN storm attacks, STP manipulation attacks, and VLAN attacks.

7. As described by the SANS Institute, which attack surface includes the use of social engineering? **HUMAN ATTACK SURFACE**. Topic 22.3.0 - The SANS Institute describes three components of the attack surface: Network Attack Surface - exploitation of vulnerabilities in networks; Software Attack Surface - exploitation of vulnerabilities in web, cloud, or host-based software applications; Human Attack Surface - exploitation of weaknesses in user behavior 

8. What is a host-based intrusion detection system (HIDS)? **it combines the functionalities of antimalware applications with firewall protection.** Topic 22.2.0 - A current HIDS is a comprehensive security application that combines the functionalities of antimalware applications with firewall protection. An HIDS not only detects malware but also prevents it from executing. Because the HIDS runs directly on the host, it is considered an agent-based system.

9. Which security endpoint setting would be used by a security analyst to determine if a computer has been configured to prevent a particular application from running? **block listing**. Topic 22.3.0 - Block listing can be used on a local system or updated on security devices such as a firewall. Block lists can be manually entered or obtained from a centralized security system. Block lists are applications that are prevented from executing because they pose a security risk to the individual system and potentially the company.

10. In Windows Firewall, when is the Domain profile applied? **when the host is connected to a trusted network such as an internal business network**. Topic 22.2.0 - The Domain profile in Windows Firewall configuration is for connections to a trusted network, such as a business network, that is assumed to have an adequate security infrastructure. 

11. As described by the SANS Institute, which attack surface includes the exploitation of vulnerabilities in wired and wireless protocols used by IoT devices? **network attack surface.** Topic 22.3.0 - The SANS Institute describes three components of the attack surface: Network Attack Surface - exploitation of vulnerabilities in networks; Software Attack Surface - exploitation of vulnerabilities in web, cloud, or host-based software applications; Human Attack Surface - exploitation of weaknesses in user behavior.

12. Which statement describes agentless antivirus protection? **Antivirus scans are performed on hosts from a centralized system**. Topic 22.1.0 - Host-based antivirus protection is also known as agent-based. Agent-based antivirus runs on every protected machine. Agentless antivirus protection performs scans on hosts from a centralized system.