# Technologies and Protocols

## Monitoring Common Protocols

### Syslog and NTP

The syslog standard is used for logging event messages from network devices and endpoints. he standard allows for a system-neutral means of transmitting, storing, and analyzing messages. Many types of devices from many different vendors can use syslog to send log entries to central servers that run a syslog daemon. This centralization of log collection helps to make security monitoring practical. Servers that run syslog typically listen on **UDP port 514**.

Because syslog is so important to security monitoring, syslog servers may be a target for threat actors. Some exploits, such as those involving data exfiltration, can take a long time to complete due to the very slow ways in which data is secretly stolen from the network. Some attackers may try to hide the fact that exfiltration is occurring. They attack syslog servers that contain the information that could lead to detection of the exploit. Hackers may attempt to block the transfer of data from syslog clients to servers, tamper with or destroy log data, or tamper with the software that creates and transmits log messages. The next generation (ng) syslog implementation, known as syslog-ng, offers enhancements that can help prevent some of the exploits that target syslog.

**Syslog messages are usually timestamped**. This allows messages from different sources to be organized by time to provide a view of network communication processes. Because the messages can come from many devices, it is important that the devices share a consistent timeclock. One way that this can be achieved is for the devices to use Network Time Protocol (NTP). NTP uses a hierarchy of authoritative time sources to share time information between devices on the network, as shown in the figure. In this way, device messages that share consistent time information can be submitted to the syslog server. **NTP operates on UDP port 123**.

Because events that are connected to an exploit can leave traces across every network device on their path to the target system, timestamps are essential for detection. Threat actors may attempt to attack the NTP infrastructure in order to corrupt time information used to correlate logged network events. This can serve to obfuscate traces of ongoing exploits. In addition, threat actors have been known to use NTP systems to direct DDoS attacks through vulnerabilities in client or server software. While these attacks do not necessarily result in corrupted security monitoring data, they can disrupt network availability.

### DNS

Domain Name Service (DNS) is used by millions of people daily. Because of this, many organizations have less stringent policies in place to protect **against DNS-based threats than they have to protect against other types of exploits**. Attackers have recognized this and commonly encapsulate different network protocols within DNS to evade security devices. **DNS is now used by many types of malware. Some varieties of malware use DNS to communicate with command-and-control (CnC) servers and to exfiltrate data in traffic disguised as normal DNS queries**. **Various types of encoding, such as Base64, 8-bit binary, and Hex can be used to camouflage the data and evade basic data loss prevention (DLP) measures**.

For example, malware could encode stolen data as the subdomain portion of a DNS lookup for a domain where the nameserver is under control of an attacker. A DNS lookup for ‘long-string-of-exfiltrated-data.example.com’ would be forwarded to the nameserver of example.com, which would record ‘long-string-of-exfiltrated-data’ and reply back to the malware with a coded response.

It is likely that the subdomain part of such requests would be much longer than usual requests. Cyber analysts can use the distribution of the lengths of subdomains within DNS requests to construct a mathematical model that describes normality. They can then use this to compare their observations and identify an abuse of the DNS query process. For example, it would not be normal to see a host on your network sending a query to aW4gcGxhY2UgdG8gcHJvdGVjdC.example.com.

DNS queries for randomly generated domain names, or extremely long random-appearing subdomains, should be considered suspicious, especially if their occurrence spikes dramatically on the network. DNS proxy logs can be analyzed to detect these conditions. Alternatively, services such as the Cisco Umbrella passive DNS service can be used to block requests to suspected CnC and exploit domains.

### HTTP and HTTPS

**Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the backbone protocol of the World Wide Web**. However, **all information carried in HTTP is transmitted in plaintext from the source computer to the destination on the internet**. HTTP does not protect data from alteration or interception by malicious parties, which is a serious threat to privacy, identity, and information security. All browsing activity should be considered to be at risk.

A common exploit of HTTP is called iFrame (inline frame) injection. Most web-based threats consist of malware scripts that have been planted on webservers. These webservers then direct browsers to infected servers by loading iframes. In iFrame injection, a threat actor compromises a webserver and plants malicious code which creates an invisible iFrame on a commonly visited webpage. When the iFrame loads, malware is downloaded, frequently from a different URL than the webpage that contains the iFrame code. Network security services, such as Cisco Web Reputation filtering, can detect when a website attempts to send content from an untrusted website to the host, even when sent from an iFrame.

To address the alteration or interception of confidential data, **many commercial organizations have adopted HTTPS or implemented HTTPS-only policies to protect visitors to their websites and services**.

**HTTPS adds a layer of encryption to the HTTP protocol by using secure socket layer (SSL)**. This makes the HTTP data unreadable as it leaves the source computer until it reaches the server. **Note that HTTPS is not a mechanism for web server security. It only secures HTTP protocol traffic while it is in transit**.

The encryption layer (SSL/TLS) is between application (HTTP) and transport layer (TCP)

Unfortunately, the encrypted HTTPS traffic complicates network security monitoring. Some security devices include SSL decryption and inspection; however, this can present processing and privacy issues. In addition, HTTPS adds complexity to packet captures due to the additional messaging involved in establishing the encrypted connection. This process is summarized in the figure and represents additional overhead on top of HTTP.

HTTPS transactions:

1. Client browser requests a secure page with https://
2. Web server sends its public key with its certificate
3. Client browser ensures that the certification is unexpired or unrevoked and was issued by a trusted party.
4. Client browser creates a symmetric key and sends it to the server
5. Web server decrypts the symmetric key using its private key
6. Web server uses the symmetric key to encrypt the page and sends it to the client
7. Client browser uses the symmetric key to decrypt the page and display the information to the user

### Email Protocols

Email protocols such as **SMTP, POP3, and IMAP** can be used by threat actors to spread malware, exfiltrate data, or provide channels to malware CnC servers.

SMTP sends data from a host to a mail server and between mail servers. Like DNS and HTTP, it is a common protocol to see leaving the network. Because there is so much SMTP traffic, it is not always monitored. However, **SMTP has been used in the past by malware to exfiltrate data from the network**. In the 2014 hack of Sony Pictures, one of the exploits used SMTP to exfiltrate user details from compromised hosts to CnC servers. This information may have been used to help develop exploits of secured resources within the Sony Pictures network. Security monitoring could reveal this type of traffic based on features of the email message.

**IMAP and POP3** are used to download email messages from a mail server to the host computer. For this reason, they are the application protocols that are responsible for bringing malware to the host. **Security monitoring can identify when a malware attachment entered the network and which host it first infected**. Retrospective analysis can then track the behavior of the malware from that point forward. In this way, the malware behavior can better be understood and the threat identified. Security monitoring tools may also allow recovery of infected file attachments for submission to malware sandboxes for analysis.

### ICMP Internet Control Message Protocol

ICMP has many legitimate uses, however ICMP functionality has also been used to craft a number of types of exploits. **ICMP can be used to identify hosts on a network, the structure of a network, and determine the operating systems at use on the network**. It can also be used as a vehicle for various types of DoS attacks.

ICMP can also be used for data exfiltration. Because of the concern that ICMP can be used to surveil or deny service from outside of the network, ICMP traffic from inside the network is sometimes overlooked. However, some varieties of malware use crafted ICMP packets to transfer files from infected hosts to threat actors using this method, which is known as ICMP tunneling.

Search the internet for a detailed explanation of the well-known LOKI exploit.

Note: One or all of the available sites in your search might be blocked by your institution’s firewall.

A number of tools exist for crafting tunnels. Search the internet for Ping Tunnel to explore one such tool.

### Check Your Understanding - Identify the Monitored Protocol

1. Which of the following can carry malware payloads into the network? IMAP
2. Which of the following presents challenges to decoding packet captures? HTTPS
3. Which of the following can be used to exfiltrate data hidden in the query messages? DNS
4. Time stamps that are provided by which protocol may be corrupted to complicate event correlation? NTP

## Security Technologies

### ACLs

Many technologies and protocols can have impacts on security monitoring. Access Control Lists (ACLs) are among these technologies. ACLs can give a false sense of security if they are overly relied upon. ACLs, and packet filtering in general, are technologies that contribute to an evolving set of network security protections.

Attackers can determine which IP addresses, protocols, and ports are allowed by ACLs. This can be done either by port scanning, penetration testing, or through other forms of reconnaissance. Attackers can craft packets that use spoofed source IP addresses. Applications can establish connections on arbitrary ports. Other features of protocol traffic can also be manipulated, such as the established flag in TCP segments. Rules cannot be anticipated and configured for all emerging packet manipulation techniques.

In order to detect and react to packet manipulation, more sophisticated behavior and context-based measures need to be taken. **Cisco Next Generation firewalls, Advanced Malware Protection (AMP), and email and web content appliances are able to address the shortcomings of rule-based security measures**.

### NAT and PAT

**Network Address Translation (NAT) and Port Address Translation (PAT) can complicate security monitoring**. Multiple IP addresses are mapped to one or more public addresses that are visible on the internet, hiding the individual IP addresses that are inside the network (inside addresses).

This problem can be especially relevant with NetFlow data. **NetFlow flows are unidirectional and are defined by the addresses and ports that they share**. NAT will essentially break a flow that passes a NAT gateway, making flow information beyond that point unavailable. Cisco offers security products that will “stitch” flows together even if the IP addresses have been replaced by NAT.

NetFlow is discussed in more detail later in the module.

### Encryption, Encapsulation, and Tunneling

Encryption can present challenges to security monitoring by making packet details unreadable. **Encryption is part of VPN technologies. In VPNs, a commonplace protocol like IP, is used to carry encrypted traffic**. The encrypted traffic essentially establishes **a virtual point-to-point connection between networks over public facilities**. Encryption makes the traffic unreadable to any other devices but the VPN endpoints.

A similar technology can be used to create a virtual point-to-point connection between an internal host and threat actor devices. Malware can establish an encrypted tunnel that rides on a common and trusted protocol, and use it to exfiltrate data from the network. A similar method of data exfiltration was discussed previously for DNS.

### Peer-to-Peer Networking and Tor

In peer-to-peer (P2P) networking, hosts can operate in both client and server roles. Three types of P2P applications exist: file sharing, processor sharing, and instant messaging. In file sharing P2P, files on a participating machine are shared with members of the P2P network. Examples of this are the once popular Napster and Gnutella. Bitcoin is a P2P operation that involves the sharing of a distributed database, or ledger, that records Bitcoin balances and transactions. BitTorrent is a P2P file sharing network.

Any time that unknown users are provided access to network resources, security is a concern. File-sharing P2P applications should not be allowed on corporate networks. P2P network activity can circumvent firewall protections and is a common vector for the spread of malware. P2P is inherently dynamic. It can operate by connecting to numerous destination IP addresses, and it can also use dynamic port numbering. Shared files are often infected with malware, and threat actors can position their malware on P2P clients for distribution to other users.

Processor sharing P2P networks donate processor cycles to distributed computational tasks. Cancer research, searching for extraterrestrials, and scientific research use donated processor cycles to distribute computational tasks.

Instant messaging (IM) is also considered to be a P2P application. IM has legitimate value within organizations that have geographically distributed project teams. In this case, specialized IM applications are available, such as the Webex Teams platform, which are more secure than IM that uses public servers.

Tor is a software platform and network of P2P hosts that function as internet routers on the Tor network. The Tor network allows users to browse the internet anonymously. Users access the Tor network by using a special browser. When a browsing session is begun, the browser constructs a layered end-to-end path across the Tor server network that is encrypted, as shown in the figure. Each encrypted layer is “peeled away” like the layers of an onion (hence “onion routing”) as the traffic traverses a Tor relay. The layers contain encrypted next-hop information that can only be read by the router that needs to read the information. In this way, no single device knows the entire path to the destination, and routing information is readable only by the device that requires it. Finally, at the end of the Tor path, the traffic reaches its internet destination. When traffic is returned to the source, an encrypted layered path is again constructed.

Tor presents a number of challenges to cybersecurity analysts. First, Tor is widely used by criminal organizations on the “dark net.” In addition, Tor has been used as a communications channel for malware CnC. Because the destination IP address of Tor traffic is obfuscated by encryption, with only the next-hop Tor node known, Tor traffic avoids block lists that have been configured on security devices.

### Load Balancing

Load balancing involves the distribution of traffic between devices or network paths to prevent overwhelming network resources with too much traffic. If redundant resources exist, a load balancing algorithm or device will work to distribute traffic between those resources, as shown in the figure.

One way this is done on the internet is through various techniques that use DNS to send traffic to resources that have the same domain name but multiple IP addresses. In some cases, the distribution may be to servers that are distributed geographically. This can result in a single internet transaction being represented by multiple IP addresses on the incoming packets. This may cause suspicious features to appear in packet captures. In addition, some load balancing manager (LBM) devices use probes to test for the performance of different paths and the health of different devices. For example, an LBM may send probes to the different servers that it is load balancing traffic to in order to detect that the servers are operating. This is done to avoid sending traffic to a resource that is not available. These probes can appear to be suspicious traffic if the cybersecurity analyst is not aware that this traffic is part of the operation of the LBM.

The figure shows a PC on the right with 1. user wants to visit www.example.com. d n s query sent. A arrow labeled d n s query www.example.com points to a server labeled ns.locallsp.com. Under the server: 2. local d n s server lacks record for example.com, queries other servers. There are two servers to the right of the server and an arrow pointing to each of them. The server in the top right has 3. request reaches authoritative d n s server for domain. N S record delegates request to load balancer at www.example.com. An arrow goes back to the ns.locallsp.com server. The other server to the right labeled loadBalance.example.com and 4. load balancer returns i p address for server in the server pool depending on load. An arrow also goes back to the ns.locallsp.com server. Another arrow goes from the ns.locallsp.com server to the client and that arrow has words: i p address of www.example.com load-balanced server.

### Check Your Understanding - Identify the Impact of the Technology on Security and Monitoring

1. Which of the following spreads malware-infected files and creates vulnerabilities on a network? P2P
2. Which of the following can be defeated by packets containing spoofed IP addresses? ACL
3. Which of the following makes message contents and file attachments unreadable? Encryption
4. Which of the following hides identity details of users who are browsing the web? TOR