# Cert Prep inLearning

## Controlling Access

### Principles of Least Privilege

Assign only the privileges needed to a program, process, or privileged user of a system, for the shortest time necessary, in as small a domain as possible to complete a task without hindrance.

* Monitor permissions
* Avoid permission creep
* Admin should have two accounts: one as regular user and, therefore for regular actions; one as admin user, therefore for administrative actions.
* run apps with the least privilege, which means a reduction of the risk of malware escalating privileges to the admin level.
* in Active Directory, create a security group, role-based permissions

### Access control

A combination of methods designed to restrict access to only authorized individuals or processes.

Layered approach to securing the network through three layeres:

1. logical
2. physical
3. administrative

Administrative controls are related to the policies, procedures, and guidelines. They are can be acceptalbe use, separation of duties, incident response. Administrative controls also include securiuty education training and awareness for all employees.

Logical controls are also called technical controls and are related to hardware devices, appliances, and software that allow or deny access to protected resources (firewall, intrusion detection, and intrusion protection). Triple A security: authentication, authorization, and accounting.

Physical controls are methods to prevent or detect unauthorized access to restricted areas. 

### Access control models

Basiclly access control check if the subject has the appropriate permission to: Does the subject have the appropriate permission to?

To ensure compliance with policies, we use auditing, which records or logs events.

Discretionary access control: allows the object owner to decide who can access the object; at the owner's discretion, they can grant permissions to allow users or groups to access the object.

Mandatory access control: the OS determines how subjects interact with the objects; MAC is based on labels that define their security clearance; the subject cannot change the predefined levels (secret, top secret, classified).

Role-based access control: based on the subject's roles and responsibilities within the organization; this permission is commonly assigned by the administrators using AD Group Policy

Rule-based access control: uses a set of rules that must be met in order for the subject to access the data or system; rules include the conditions that must be met, and the rules do not always involve the subject. The rule can permit or deny based on an IP address or OS.

Rule-based and role based access control can work together in a controlling access.

Attribute-based control access control: also called policy-based access control based on the subject's attributes

### Triple-A security

Access control is a framework that enables an authorized subject to interact with objects or resources on the network. Triple-A security means Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting. It is a model that uses three independent security functions to control access and defend infra.

Authentication confirms the identity of a person or process. Can be what you know, what you have, what you are, where you are, something you do. Use multi-factor authentication.

Authorization defines what a subject is allow to do once they're on the network.
Accounting monitors what has been done while the subject was on the network.

Two ways to implement access control:

1. decentralized access control: gives access control to users closer to resource; no method of consistent control
2. centralized access control: centralized entity oversees access; provides consistent and uniform access control.

To a better implementation of Triple-A security, is recommended a centralized or server based one, such as **RADIUS** or **TACACS**+.

Radius is stand for Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service. It is a client/server model for Triple-A Sec. Open standard and can be used with all vendors.

TACACS+ is stand for Terminal Access Controller Access Control System. It provides access control for routers, network access servers, and other networked computing devices. Cisco proprietary protocol.

|          |   RADIUS      | TACACS+|
|----------|---------------|--------|
|Triple-A  |Combines AAA   |Separate AAA|
|Transport |UDP            |TCP|
|Standard  |Open Standard  |Cisco proprietary|
|Encryption|Pass encrypted |Entire payload|


