# Cisco CBROPS exam

## Module Exploring Security Concepts

### Threat actors

Threat actors are those individuals or even entities with malicious intent that launch cyberattacks against individuals, GOVs and ONGs.

**Three types of hackers:**

* White hat hacker: identifies and tests vulnerabilities, ethical hacking
* Gray hat hacker: mischievous, threat actor (amateur);
* Black hat hacker: tries to cause harm, threat actor: nations state, hacktivist, insider, terrorist

### Manage Risk

* Protect sensitive information
* keep data private, unchanged, and available
* CIA triad: a widely recognized information assurance model, which stands for Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability.

**Private Information could include**:

* Personally identifiable information (PII): social security, credit card, or bank account numbers
* Business information: data, employee records, and trade secrets

### Zero Trust Policy

In a zero trust policy the principle is 'Never trust, always verify first.'

1. Workforce: Anyone who can access organization resources using either their personal or corporate-managed devices; Restricts access so that only authorized users and devices can access corporate resources, regardless of their location

2. Workload: Apps that are running in the cloud, in data centers, or other virtualized environments that need to interact with one another; Focuses on secure access when an API, microservice, or container is accessing a database within an application.

3. Workplace: Focuses on secure access for all devices that connect to enterprise networks; Devices include the internet of things (IoT), endpoints, physical and virtual servers, and printers.

### Risk

**Risk** is when a person, a place or thing is open or exposed to harm.
**Risk analysis**: orgs actively analyze risk and evaluate potential issues that could negatively impact the business; the goal is to reduce risk to protect assets, which are tangible and intangible items that can be assigned a value.

**Formula to calculate risk is**: Risk = Threat x vulnerability

**Threat**: anything that can exploit a vulnerability, intentionally or accidentally, and obtain, damage, or destroy an asset. Something that might happen and is difficult to control; includes malware, terrorists, or nature.

**Identify vulnerabilities**: a security flaw or weakness in a system that can be exploited by threats to gain unauthorized access to an asset. Connecting a system to the internet can represent a vulnerability if the system is unpatched. Includes weak passwords, human error, or software flaws.

**Risk analysis** considers potential threats, such as a cyber attack; and evaluate system weakness, such as a missing password.

Managing risk can be done through for actions: Identify risk, analyze it, plan to reduce it, and take steps to mitigate it. That is a ongoing process, so the actions continuously return to identify new risks, for monitoring and managing risk. With that the purpose is reduce the potential for harm.  

**Remember: risk = threat x vulnerability; but how can those three work together?**

Case study: image three computers in which each of them is in a different state, for instance:

Computer 1: Older computer with no protection (100% vulnerable)
Computer 2: Uses free antimalware with no automatic updates (40% vulnerable)
Computer 3: Up-to-date OS with antimalware with automatic updates (10% vulnerable).

In each computer **the threat from a phishing**, for instance, is 100%. Therefore, inputting the data in the formula, we have:

PC 1 = 100% * 100%, risk = 100%
PC 2 = 100% * 40%, risk = 40%
PC 3 = 100% * 10%, risk = 10%

**If we reduce the vulnerabilities, we reduce the overall risk.**

### Exercise

What is a malware? Malware is a short for 'malicious software', which means any intrusive software developed by cybercriminals to steal data and damage or destroy computers and computer systems.

What are the seven types of malware? List each type and provide: a brief description, how is it transmitted? What type of damage or outcome could occur?

The seven types of malware are: virus, worms, trojans virus, spyware, adware, ransomware, fileless malware.

Virus: it is a malicious software attached to a document or file that supports macros to execute its code and spread from host to host. It will lay dormant until the file is opened and used. Viruses are designed to disrupt a system's ability to operate and, as result, it can cause significant operational issues and data loss.

Worms: it a malicious code that rapidly replicates and spreads to any device within the network. Unlike viruses, worms do not need host programs to disseminate. A worm infects a device via a downloaded file or a network connection before it multiplies and disperses at an exponential rate. Like a viruses, they can severely disrupt the operations of a device and cause data loss.

Trojan: it is disguised as helpful software programs. But once the user downloads it, the trojan virus can gain access to sensitive data and then modify, block, or delete the data. It can affect the performance of the device and, unlike normal viruses and worms, trojan viruses are not designed to self-replicate.

Spyware: it runs secretly on a computer and reports back to a remote user. Rather than simply disrupting a device's operations, spyware targets sensitive information and can grant remote access to predators. It is often used to steal personal or financial data. Between the spyware, a keylogger is a special one, which records your keystrokes to reveal passwords and personal information.

Adware: it a malicious code used to collect data on your computer and provide appropriate ads to you. Adware is not always safe because sometimes it can redirect you browser to unsafa sites, in which can contain trojan horses and spyware. Additionally, significant level of adware can slow down your system noticeably.

Ransomware: it is a malicious software that gains access to sensitive information within a system, encrypts that information so that the user cannot access it, and then demands a financial payout for the data to be released. Ransomware is commonly part of a phishing scam, through which the malware is downloaded. The attack proceeds to encrypt specific information that can only be opened by a mathematical key, that only the attackers know. Hypothetically, only when the arracker receives payment, the data is unlocked.

Fileless malware: it is a fileless malware, which means, a type of memory-resident malware. Because there is no file, it becomes harder to detect than traditional malwares.

Hoax:

PUP