# Cisco CBROPS exam

## Module Assessing Vulnerabilities

### NIST Guide to conduct Risk Assessments

**Nist scales vulnerability severity in five levels**:

**Very high**: The vulnerability is exposed and exploitable, and its exploitation could result in severe impacts
**High**: The vulnerability is of high concern, based on the exposure of the vulnerability and ease of exploitation and/or on the severity of impacts that could result from its exploitation
**Moderate**: The vulnerability is of moderate concern, based on the exposure of the vulnerability and ease of exploitation and/or on the severity of impacts that could result from its exploitation
**Low**: The vulnerability is of minor concern, but effectiveness of remediation could be improved.
**Very low**: The vulnerability is not of concern.

[NIST document can be download from:](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf)

### CVSS

**CVSS is determined by these metrics**: base group, temporal metric group, environmental metric group.

**The base group** represents the basic qualities of a vulnerability that are **constant over time and across user environments**

    1. Exploitability metrics
        Attack Vector (or Access vector is how the threat exploits the vulnerability), 
        Attack Complexity (how easy (or difficult) it is for the threat to exploit the vulnerability),
        Privileges Required (describes how the threat gains access), 
        User Interaction (either none or required).
    2. Impact Metrics 
        confidentiality, 
        integrity impact, 
        availability impact
    3. Scope captures whether a vulnerability is one vulnerable component impacts resources in components beyond its security scope.

**The temporal metrics** indicates the current state of the exploit, which will change over the lifetime of the vulnerability.
    
    1. Exploit code maturity
    2. Remediation Level
    3. Report Confidence


**Environmental metric group** characterizes a vulnerability that is unique to a use's environment.

    1. Modified base metrics: at this point, the analyst to override individual base metrics, such as Exploitability, Scope, or Impact. security requirement that measures how the vulnerability affects the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of an asset.
        2. Confidentiality requirement**
        3. Integrity requirement
        4. Availability requirement 


### CVE - Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures

CVE provides detailed information on known vulnerabilities. Each CVE has an ID, score, and addtional information. The score is derived from a set of metrics using **CVSS**. The **CVE** feeds into the National Vulnerability Databse (**NVD**).

### Exercise

About the temporal metric group, explain:

1. the exploit code maturity: this is a metric that measure the likelihood of the vulnerability being attacked, and is typically based on the current state of exploit techniques, exploit code availability, or active, 'in-the-wild' exploitation.

2. outline what metrics determine the remediation level: the remediation level metric is an important factor for prioritization. Generally, the typical vulnerability is unpatched when initially published. Workaround or hotfixes may offer interim remediation until an official patch or upgrade is issued. The main metrics are: not defined or unavailable mean there is either no solution available or it is impossible to apply; workaround is an unofficial, non-vendor solution available; temporary hotfix means that there is an official but temporary fix available; official fix means that a complete vendor solution is available.

3. define report confidence: This metric measures the degree of confidence in the existence of the vulnerability and the credibility of the known technical details.