# Cert Prep inLearning

## Security Monitoring

### Examining System Data

#### Exploring CLI tools

linux: tcpdump
windows: tshark, dumpcap

dumpcap is over the tshark, tcpdump, so it is more eficient.

#### Analyzing data with NetFlow

1. Aggregates data on the network
2. Analyzes traffic passing in or out of an interface
3. Gathers data into a compact record

Netflows produces a summary: ingress interface, source IP address, destination IP address, IP protocol, source ports, destination ports, type and code for ICMP, IP type of service.

IDS and Netflow: gather and store network transaction, monitor traffic for anomalies (detect network scans, denial-of-service attacks, communicate with a command and control server)

#### Monitoring traffic with a stateful firewall

Stateful firewalls:

1. better than packet inspection
2. monitors each active state or connection
3. occurs at L3, L4 of the OSI model.

TCP Session

* new connections are checked against the security policy
    * allows or denies passage of the packet
    * updates the state table
* existing connections are checked against the state table

Stateful inspection monitors the state of the connection,
from: SYN (dst_port=80) / SYN-ACK (src_port=80) / ACK
to: FIN / FIN-ACK / ACK

Statefull Firewall Challenges:

1. Stateless protocols such as UDP and ICMP
2. Stateful firewalls do not monitor at application layer
3. Stateful firewalls do not ensure authentication methods

Stateful firewalls monitor sessions using a state table, which keeps track of all current connections.

#### Deploying a next-generation firewall

High-end hardware firewalls provide high performance for small and midsize businesses, provide edge protection and critical infrastrucuture environments, without reducing network performance. The appliance is designed for high-throughput requirements. Most have intelligent features such as built-in UTM.

Unified Threat Management: intrusion prevention; antivirus and antispyware; data loss prevention; content filtering

Reasons for Egress Filtering:

1. Stop malware from connecting to malware's command server
2. block unwanted services
3. avoid contributing to DDoS attacks, spamming, and botnets.

Firewall limitations:

1. if access control lists are not configured properly, network performance can suffer
2. if the firewall's input buffers are too small, this can lead to bufferbloat and dropped packets.
3. Ensure that the firewall is robust and resistant to attacks

#### Application Visibility and Control (AVC)

Allows the administrator to recognize, analyze, and control the different applications on the network.

**Since stateful firewall occurs at the network and transport layer of the OSI model, as a result the application layer is not protected.**

For that, **Application Layer Firewall**, which is an extension to stateful packet inspection; monitors and filter requests for **L3-7 of the OSI model**; application aware and examines the entire packet, not just the network address and por number.

#### Filtering web and email content

Web content filtering: block risky websites; 
Email content filtering: 

Many dedicated appliances use a similar process.