# Cert Prep inLearning

## Limiting Data Visibility

### Access Control List (ACL)

It is a list of rules that provides another layer of security, because:

1. devices examine traffic
2. allowing or denying based on criteria

Cisco IOS uses two types of ACL: standard and extended. The standard one filters only on source IP address; On the other hand, extended one filters on source and destination IP, protocol and port numbers.

### Translating the address

Network Address Translation (NAT) and Port Address Translation (PAT) converts a private IP address to a public IP address and vice versa.

Private IP address by classes:

Class A: 10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255/8
Class B: 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255/16
Class C: 192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255/16

**All classes are unregistered and must be translated before exiting the LAN**.

Network Address Translation (NAT) operates on a router and converts a private IP address to a public IP address and vice versa.

Port Address Translation is a NAT overloading, and uses IP address and port number combination. The ports must be greater than 1024 because from 0 to 1023 are the known ports.

### Evading and hiding techniques.

**Resource exhaustion** occurs when a malicious actor deliberately sends a huge amount of traffic to the security device. **The flood of traffic is essentially a DoS** that will consume all of the device's resources and prevent legitimate attacks from being logged.

**Traffic fragmentation** is an older evasion technique that splits a malicious payload into smaller packets in order to bypass security devices.

**Protocol-level misinterpretation** causes the network IPS sensor to misinterpret the end-to-end meaning of network protocols. It can occur when network device does not properly handle features of a PDU, such as a checksum or TTL value.

**Traffic substitution** substitutes the payload by enconding the data with a different format but has the same meaning.

**Traffic insertion** occurs when the threat actor inserts extra bytes in a malicious sequence of data, the IPS rules can potentially miss the malicious data and accept the full payload.

**Pivoting** is a technique used to compromised host to gain access to other systems on the network.

**Rootkit** is a complex attack used to communicate with the lowest levels of the OS, concealing its activities on the system.

Proxies can be used to redirect network traffic using intermediate systems.

### Tunneling and encapsulation

https://blog.stalkr.net/2010/10/hacklu-ctf-challenge-9-bottle-writeup.html

### Using encryption to hide

Using encryption helps protect our data, wireless transmissions, email, and ecommerce transctions. However, malicious actors are finding ways to use encryption that threatens the security of our systems.