# Cert Prep inLearning

## Using Certificates

### Protecting data and networks

Ensure confidentiality, integrity, and authentication of data whether in motion or at rest. Encryption is the most effective ways to secure digital data.

There are two main types of encryption: symmetric and asymmetric.
Asymmetric is also known as public key encryption and uses two keys, a public key and a private key. Symmetric encryption is also called conventional encryption and uses only one key, which is called shared key.

Cryptographic techniques can be used in:

1. Confidentiality: use encryption
2. Integrity: use a hash function
3. Accountability: use a digital signature
4. Authentication :use a message authentication code


### Ensuring trust on the Internet

Some concepts:

1. Key exchange: it is a secure exchange of the shared secret key between parts.
2. Digital signature: it is a value generated using public key encryption, whereby the origin and integrity of data is verifies.
3. Certificate Authority (CA): it is a trusted third party in a hybrid cryptography system, whereby the certificates are issued. We use a CA when using Secure Sockets Layer to communicate securely on the web.
4. Trust: trust the key is from the entity from whom we receive it.
5. Certificate: it is a set of descriptive data, that assures that a public key is valid.
6. Public Key Infrastrucure (PKI): PKI is a framework that generates, manages and distributes digital certifies. Symmetric encryption uses a single shared key; asymmmetric encryption uses a pair of keys; the public key is shared for everyone to see and use; how do we trust a public key? In order to trust the public key is valid and from the genuine entity, we use a Certificate Authority or trusted third party.

### Examining an X.509 certificate

X.509 Standard is the IETF standard that defines the PKI digital certificate format.

### Describing certificate classes

Certificate classes, highest the classe, more certificate the certificate:
0: Testing, no checks performed
1: individuals, email verification
2: organizations, more rigorous testing
3: verification done by CA
4: online transaction between companies
5: private organizations

When using a digital certificate, a higher number indicates a more trustworthy certificate.

### Grasping the public key cryptography standards (PKCS)

PKCS #1: defines the rules and construct of the RSA encryption standard; includes generating the public and private keys, digital certificates, and the digital signature scheme.

PKCS #3: provides the methodology to use the DH and specific isntructions for some of the parameters in order to generate an appropriate key length.

PKCS #10: defines the construct of an X.509 certificate from the certificate authority (CA); includes componentes such as public key, a distinguished name, and a digital signature of the CA.

### Managing keys using IKE

Internet Protocol Security (IPSec) uses cryptographic keys to secure traffic. The keys can be managed by manually on a LAN between two servers; or through IKE on automates the process.

IKE compromises two protocols:

1. ISAKMP, which authenticates hosts, manages session keys, and coordinates security associations;
2. Oakley employs the Diffie-Hellman key agreement protocol to exchange keys between hosts.

When setting up the security association, IKE has two phases:

1. Authenticates the IPSec peers and then prepares a secure channel in order to generate the shared keys, using digital certificates, asymmetric encryption or pre-shared keys.

2. Negotiates the security services and create the security association (SA) on both peers.

Once the IPsec is et up on both sides of the communication path, both parties will be able to securely exchange data.

### Outlining the different protocol versions

SSL/TLS provides a way to encrypt and secure traffic. But the use of an SSL VPN has been deprecated since 2015; therefore, we will focus on TLS.

Application Layer           |FTP         | HTTP               | SMTP |
TLS --> Handshake layer     |Handshake   | Change Cipher Spec | Alert|
    -->                     |           Record Protocol              |
Transport Layer             |   Transmission Control Protocol        |
Network Layer               |   Internet Protocol                    |

Handshake protocols authenticate the peers, establishes the cryptographic parameters of the session, and exchanges the key.

Record protocol encrypts and/or authenticates data transmitted between client and server.

Protocol evolution
1. SSL 2.0 - SSL 3.0: represets early versions of the protocol no longer used
2. TLS 1.0: essentially an upgrade of SSL3.0, deprecated in 2020; you may still see this version in use.
3. TLS 1.1 (2006): deprecated in 2020; you may still see this version in use;
4. TLS 1.2 (2008): offers improved algorithms for authentication along with modified cipher suites.
5. TLS 1.3 (2018): has removed support for obsolete or insecure features, reduced the cipher suites to four, and mandated the use of perfect forward secrecy.

### Configuring the cipher suite

Beginning a TLS session:

1. Two hosts must complete a handshake prior to exchanging any data;
2. The handshake is the most complex part of TLS, because both parties must agree on the terms of the session and must be complete before any application data is transmitted.

