# Cert Prep inLearning

## Host-based Analysis

### Outlining the Windows OS

Windows architecture works with two modes: user and kernel:
User mode is on the surface:

User mode
Application <----> Windows API
Windows API -----> User-mode drivers

Kernel
User-mode drivers <-------> Other kernel-mode drivers
Windows API <--------> Operating System Kernel
Windows API <--------> Other kernel-mode drivers
Windows API <--------> File System Drivers

Other kernel-mode drivers <-------> Hardware Abstraction Layer
Operating System Kernel <-------> Hardware Abstraction Layer
Hardware Abstraction Layer <-------> Hardware

The kernel is the core of OS and has control over the entire computer. It works like a translator, receiving and handling requests.

Hardware Abstraction Layer, or HAL, handles all of the communication between the kernel and the hardware.

User applications, which are isolated, request go through the OS to access hardware resources. Craches are restricted to the application.

Code running as kernel mode have unrestricted access to the underlying hardware; it is capable of executing any CPU instruction and it can reference any memory address directly.

Rootkit runs with superuser privileges, and can sniff passwords, create hidden directories, avoid any security measures.

Rootkit can be user mode, which can:
    provide backdoor access
    disable system and security services
    hide processes, files, and network interfaces
    has a greater chance of being detected.

Rootkit can be kernel mode, which is more advanced, and can
    cause system craches

When using Windows OS, it's important to understand user mode and kernel mode and the hardware abstraction layer.

### Dissect the Windows file system

The file system can provide an additional level of security
The Windows uses NTFS

Prior NTFS, it was used FAT (File Allocation TAble), which was:

1. a simple Windows File System
2. A table that exists at the very top of the volume
3. FAT has serious limitations in providing security
4. Fat does not support a variety of permissions

Rather, NTFS:

1. NTFS has an advanced ability to secure the file system
2. More access control
3. User-defined attributes can be added to a file
4. A timestamp indicates when the file was lat accessed

NTFS permissions:

1. Define the type of access granted
2. Full control, modify, list folder contents
3. Can be applied to folder and files

inheritance is a powerfull concept in file system permission. It is used in file system and Active Directory permissions (does not apply to shared permissions)

NTFS permissions types:

1. explicit: directly applied to the file or folder
2. Inherited: permissions that extend into child objects
3. Effective: explicit and inherited

File and folder Permissions:

1. based on the permission granted to each individual user via Windows login
2. Effective regardless of whether they are on the local machine or accessing the resource over the network via a shared folder.

NTFS permissions are:

1. Full control
2. Modify
3. Read & Execute
4. List folder contents
5. Read
6. Write
7. Special permissions

Share permissions

1. Full control
2. Change
3. Read
4. No access 

If 'no access' is set on an NTFS folder, and 'Full control' is set on share, 'No access' will result.

Hidden Administrative Shares

* It is automatically created
* Indicated by a $ at the end of the share
* Permissions cannot be modified

NTFS has extensive and granular permissions to restrict or allow access to files and folders.

### Working with windows registry

1. Stores configuration settings, options, and user information
2. Values for any software or hardware that is installed
3. Comprised of five hives
    Group of keys, subkeys and values

HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT
1. File extension or other necessary information
2. Windows will know what action to take when searching a drive or opening a specific type of file

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE
1. Stores system-related data specific to the local computer
2. Configuration informatino for the OS and software
3. information on hardware and device drives.

HKEY_USERS
1. Settings for all users on the computer
2. HKEY_CURRENT_USER is a subkey that contains the settings and configuration information specific to the user that is currently logged in to the system.

HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG
1. stores the current hardware profile used at bootup

### Running Windows OS

Startup process: BIOS (basic input/output system) or UEFI (unified extensible firmware interface) -> Initialize -> MBR -> POST -> Load OS.

UEFI was created to replace the BIOS program on modern computers. A computer that uses UEFI stores boot code in the firmware, which helps to increase the security of the computer at boot time because the compuer goes directly into protected mode.

Once that process began, hardware is initialized and Power-on self test (POST) performed, after MBR loads the OS.

During this process two important registry hives are used to automatically start applications and services:

1. HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE: services that need start in each boot.
2. HKEY_CURRENT_USER

### manage network settings

netsh ?

netstat -ano