# Work with network security data

## Comparing methods to examine traffic

### Stateless Firewall

* It is a simple packet filter that filters inspect packets
* It Checks the source and destination address
* It checks protocol, port, or other static values
* It treats each packet in isolation and, for that, it does not monitor traffic patterns or data flows. And it does not keep track of the state of network connections. In additions, it does not any payload inspection.
* It is faster and perform better under heavier traffic loads.

### Stateful Firewall

* Each packet is based on the context of an active state or connection
* It occurs at L3 and L4 of the OSI model
* The packets are examined as a part of a TCP session
* Stateful firewall challenges:
    * stateless protocols such as UDP or ICMP
    * since the protection occurs at L3 and L4, the application layer is not protected

### Deep packet

The inspection examines every part of a packet and is constantly vigilant for an attack signature.

## Comparing IPS and IDS

* IPS and IDS are used to increase the security level of the network
* They are monitors for unusual or suspicious data or activities
* they are a stand-alone device or integrated within an Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) or router
* They inspect ingress and egress traffic
* They use a combination of signatures and heuristic-based analysis
* Both techniques of IDS must be tune correctly to avoid excess false positive alerts.
* IDS and IPS are sensors that monitor for unusual or suspicious data or activities in a network and provide an extra layer of protection

### IDS

* It is out band in a promiscuous mode and passively monitors network traffic
* traffic is mirrored to the IDS, when the IDS can check the packet against the signature database. If it is a malicious, it will detect, log information about the activity and report an attack
* If a malicious IDS requires other devices to respond to attacks, which means damage to the network may have already happened
* An IDS does not negatively affect the traffic flow, but it is more vulnerable to evasion techniques

### IPS

* In-band is actively monitoring the network traffic, and than it can detect and drop attacks. 
* But if the IDS is not correct configure it can cause slow down and sluggishness and affect time sensitive application

### Recognizing alerts and events


**Data can come as or from**: PCAPS, content data, transactional data, session data, host logs, alert data, syslog data, metadata

**So data moves to detections layer such as**: Snort, CapME, OSSEC, Bro, Suricata

**And, then, data is analysis**: Kibana, Wireshark, Brim

Initially there is a huge amount of data, so a reducing process is required, identifying the network data that should be gathered and stored to reduce the burden on systems.

All NSM data sources ---> ELK (reduces) ---> Relevant NSM data

ELK is stand for Elasticsearch | Logstash | Kibana

**Acquire data** : Logstach (collecting and normalizing) | Beats (software plugins that send different types of data to the Elasticsearch data stores)
**Store|Analyze**: Elasticsearch
Visualize    : Kibana (provides a graphical interface to data that is compiled by Elasticsearch)

To effectively secure the network, there is a process: gather data, detect anomalies, and then analyze the data.

### Monitoring traffic

When monitoring traffic, an IDS/IPS system will monitor for unusual or suspicious activity.

### Interpreting IDS/IPS alerts

* when an alert occurs:
    * true positive: an actual security incident
    * false positive: no event has occurred, but trigger an alert.
* when any alert occurs:
    * true negative:  no security incident has occurred
    * false negative: an undetected incident has occurred

Sometimes a precursor to an attack comes up:
    * activity leading up to an attack, such as nmap scan
    * in some cases, the security team will need to conduct further analysis as many times an attack does not occur right away.