# Using wireshark to evaluate traffic

## Understanding the OSI model

Seven-layer OSI model:
* standardizes the functions of data transformation
* breaks down into layers
* outlines how data is encapsulated

Key points:

|Layer|Name|Role|Protocols|PDU|Address|
|-----|----|----|---------|---|-------|
|7    |Application|Initiates contact with the network|HTTP, FTP, SMTP|Data||
|6|Presentation|Formats data, optional compression, and encryption||Data||
|5|Session|Initiates, maintains, and tears down session||Data||
|4|Transport|Transports data|TCP,UDP|Segment|Port|
|3|Network|Addressing routing|IP,ICMP,ARP|Packet|IP|
|2|Data link|Frame formation|Ethernet II,ARP|Frame|MAC|
|1|Physical|Data is transmitted on the media||Bits||

## Tapping into the network

* Effective monitoring begins with tapping into the network at the proper location to gather traffic for analysis.
* What you will see will depend on where on the network you place tha tap or device.

Devices can gather and monitor traffic at several locations within the network:

* gather outside: an edge device will monitor and prevent threats before entering the network
* tap the edge: egress filtering, packet shaping
* monitor inside: ids/ips will monitor for suspicious activity, devices gather and correlate similar events
* gathering at the endpoint: monitors the endpoints with the goal of preventing malicious activity

## Creating an Ethernet frame

Frame Header     IP Header      TCP/UDP Header     DATA   FCS
   Frame           Packet          Segment
MAC ADDRESS      IP ADDRESS      Port Address

FCS: Frame check sequence, which is added when the frame header is added.


Frame       Ethernet II,5rc,Asustekc_b3:01:84
             (00:1d:60:b3:01:84),Dst:Actionte_2f:
             47:87(00:26:62:2f:47:87)

Packet      Internet Protocol Version 4

Segment     Transmission Control Protocol,Src Port:
             54841(54841),Dat Port:http(80),Seq:1,
             Ack:1,Len:725

Data        Hypertext Transfer Protocol
             
### Identifying key elements from a pcap

* when examining a pcap file after an intrusion there are several key elements, such as: source and destination IP address, source and destination ports, protocols and payload.

### Log file analysis

Detection methods:
* signature-based detection
* anomaly-based detection
* stateful protocol analysis
             
### logging capabilities

Logging is an essential element in an intrusion detection and prevention system. The main fields to analyze includes:

* event date and time
* event type
* importance rating (priority, severity, impact, confidence)
* prevention action performed

After the data is collected, it will sometimes go to a centralized logging server, such as syslog or SIEM system. Whether at rest or during transit, the data should be secured against attackers who might alter or destroy the logs.

Generally, SIEM, which stands for security information and event management, is integrated with an IDPS. IDPS gathers and logs activity for validate alerts, investigate incidents, correlate events.