# Visualizing Application Data

## Analyzing HTTP

HTTP, which is stand for Hypertext Transfer Protocol, is an application layer protocol for browsing the web. One fo the most predominant ways to obtain objects and data when on the network. 

Communicating using HTTP consist of a client sending HTTP request that contain a method that indicates what the client wants; and a server responding with a status code to indicate success or failure of request.

### HTTP response code

1. Respostas de informação (100-199),
2. Respostas de sucesso (200-299),
3. Redirecionamentos (300-399)
4. Erros do cliente (400-499)
5. Erros do servidor (500-599).

### Using HTTP for malicious purposes

HTTP can be used also for malicious purposes, that include:

* data exfiltration
* malware command and control
* multistage malware as the malware is fetched in sequence
* using encryption can conceal the malicious activity.

## Dissecting DNS

Botnet control moves to descentralized C&C using P2P, which uses fast flux DNS:
* distributed C&C
* proxy redirection
* load balancing

### Fast Flux DNS

Normally a host's IP address does not change very often. But with fast flux DNS it uses alternate IP addresses to distribute traffic, using a 60-second time to live (TTL) to swap IP records.

## Using ARP

On a LAN, data link layer (L2) uses the MAC address of the destination machine rather than the IP address. ARP, which is stand for Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) provides the IP address to MAC address resolution.

## Outlining email threats

### Phising attacks

It is a way that encourage the recipient to click on a link, as a result, it shares confidential information, it can lead to a ransomware attacks, it can download malware.

### Scripts and macros

Scripts can be embedded within the email and can run when a use opens the email and completes some malicious act; malware can conceal itself in applications or even a Word doc, which might contain a virus.