# Securing Organizational Assets

## Summarizing risk management

**Risk management is an ongoing life cycle**. Cybersecurity framework from NIST, which is defined in five linked steps: identify - protect - detect - respond - recover

* Identify: 
    * why are we doing this?
    * the organization will be more vested in mitigating vulnerabilities
    * managing assets and understanding the business environment
    * develop policies, procedures, and processes
    * assessing organizational risk along with strategy for managing risk
* Protect:
    * limit or contain the impact of a cybersecurity event.
    * ensuring identity management and access control
    * providing awareness and training
    * ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information
* Detect:
    * develop and implement activities to identify a cybersecurity event
    * enables timely discovery of cybersecurity events
    * monitoring events against an established baseline
    * detection processes maintained and tested
* Respond:
    * develop and implement activities to take after a cybersecurity incident
    * incident response planning
    * analysis and forensics
    * mitigation and improvements
* Recover:
    * ensure the timely return to normal operations, and reduce the impact of a cybersecurity incident
    * recovery planning to restore systems
    * improvements by incorporating lessons learned
    * communication among key stakeholders

## Protecting Assets

Risk is when a person, place or thing is open or exposed to harm, and it is a combination of threats and vulnerabilities.

RISK = THREAT * VULNERABILITY

Threat is anything that can exploit a vulnerability, intentionally or accidentally, and obtain, damage, or destroy an asset.

A vulnerability is a security flaw or weakness in a system that can be exploited by threats to gain unauthorized access to an asset. Identify and Prioritize assets because many organizations are complex with many attack vectors: identify where critical information assets are stored, determine how users access the information.

CIS Hardware and Software Asset Tracking Spreadsheet.

## Reviewing configuration management

NIST: Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of Information Systems.

Baseline configuration is a set of specification for a system, or item within a system, formally reviewed and agreed on at a given point in time.

Configuration management plan is comprehensive description of the roles, responsibilities, policies and procedures

Configuration Management includes:

* Planning
    * determine the metrics for compliance
* Identification
    * select and name items included under CM
* Change control
    * Manage updates to the baseline
* Monitor
    * Validate that the system is adhering to policies

## Outlining mobile device management

Mobile device management

Deployment device:

* Bring your own device (BYOD): the device is owned by the employee, however, it must be corporate compliant in terms of OS version and functionality.

* Corporate owned, business only (COBO): the device is the property of the company and may only be used for company business.

* Corporate owned, personally enabled (COPE): the employee may use it to access personal data, however, they must be compliant with any AUP.

* Choose your own device (CYOD): much the same as COPE, however, the employee can select a device from a defined list.

* BYOD Best Practices
    * use access control and antimalware protection
    * disable WI-FI and Bluetooth connectivity when not in use
    * only connect to trusted networks
    * keep the device OS and other software updated
    * back up data and subscribe to a find my phone service

## Updating and patching organizational assets

* Hardening a system minimize the risk

## Creating security policies

Guidelines: recommendations
Laws: conditions outlined by a governing body
Policies: formal statements
Procedures: step-by-step instructions