# Limiting the effects of intrusions

## Identifying protected data

### Protected data

PPI, which is stand for Personally Identifiable Information, used to characterize the identity of an individual either alone or in combination with other information linked to an individual.

Examples include: full name, social security number, bank account number;

PSI, personal security information, data that can be used to access network or system services. Examples include: usernames, passwords, passphrases. 

PHI, protected health information, computerized electronic patient records are referred to as electronic protected health information (ePHI). This relates to the HIPAA, a law the mandates rigorous requirements for anyone that deals with patient information.

With HIPAA, the ePHI of any patient must be protected from exposure, or the organization can face a hefty fine.

Intellectual property, a product or invention that is the result of creativity. Examples include, a manuscript or a design.

A security specialist must be aware of the many ways data exfiltration can occur and implement ways to prevent the loss of protected data.

## Outlining the Cyber Kill Chain Model

**Step 1: reconnaissance**: it is all about gathering information, the malicious actor is researching for security vulnerabilities on your system, looking around to see data store and what data do you have. What data do you have? Where is the data located? Who can access the data? Can I go anywhere else? What can I gather?

**Step 2: Waponization**: after reconnaissance, the malicious actor is aware of the weak spots in the organization and, then, she devise a plan to get inside the network, such as using polymorphic malware that cripples a network or installs a backdoor on the system.

**Step 3: delivery**: it is when the malicious attacker crafts a plan to deliver the attack using, for instance, phishing as a method designing to the victim click in a link.

**Step 4**: Exploitation: when the malicious payload is in the network, the malicious actor set up to make their move by exploiting a vulnerability such as: missing input validation, lack of sufficient logging, not closing the database connection, using obsolete or deprecated methods.

**Step 5**: installation: the malicious actor installs the malware
**Step 6**: CoC Command and Control: gain the control of the system
**Step 7**: Actions and objectives: achieve their ultimate goal: data theft or modification, encryption the data and holding the data hostage;

The goal is to stop an attack before the malicious actors reach the final 

## Pivoting through the Diamond Model of Intrusion

Four core features, which provide a way to analyze the attack. They are adversary, capability, victim, infrastructure.

Adversary: represents the malicious actors who seek to compromise and gain access to an information system; adversaries can include insiders, groups, organizations, and nation states.

Capability: describes the techniques, tactics, and procedures (TTP) used by the adversary in the cyberattack. Methods can include low techniques such as password guessing to more sophisticated and automated techniques

Infrastructure: it represents the physical and/or logical communication structures the adversary uses to deliver the TTP and maintain control. It can include command and control, network devices, or a USB stick.

Victim: the target.

The adversary and victim are not linked directly. The analysts identifies events and links them into activity threads.

## Evaluating SOC key performance indicators

Dwell time: it is the length of time that the malicious actors have access to a network before they are detected and contained;

Mean time to detect (MTTD): the time it takes for an organization to detect problems, this MTTD metric is an essential indicator in a SOC, rapid discovery can lead the team to a speedier resolution.

Mean time to respond (MTTR): the average time required to return a system to operational condition after receiving notification of a failure or cyberattack

Mean time to contain (MTTC): the time required to stop the incident from causing further damage to systems or data; mean time to detect, understand, and contain, combination metric, represents the three metrics averaged across all incidents.

